---
author: Noah
date: 2023-01-06
tags:
  - Geography
  - Eastern Europe
  - Turkic
title: Beautiful Gagauzia, a home for one of Europe's Turkic peoples
---

Human migration is woven deep into the fabric of humanity. Although Turkic
culture is not indigenous to Europe, the Turkic peoples that call Europe home
have left an enduring linguistic and cultural legacy. One such nation lies in
Southern Moldova and is called Gagauzia. Known as _Gagauz Yeri_ in Gagauz, or
_Găgăuzia_ in Romanian and Moldovan, this small (1,832 sq km / 707 sq mi)
region is home to the Gagauz people.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/69/Flag_of_Gagauzia.svg" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>Flag of Gagauzia</p></div>

History has no conclusive origin story for the Gagauz people. In the 20th
century, a Bulgarian historian collected 19 separate origin stories for the
nation. A few years later, a Gagauz ethnologist raised this to 21.
Interestingly, where most Turkic nations practice Islam as a religion, the
Gagauz practice Eastern Orthodox Christianity. This tradition goes back
centuries, with folklore teaching us that the Gagauz were proud defenders of
Eastern Orthodoxy within the Byzantine Empire.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/13/Gagauzia_map.svg" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>Gagauzia shown in red within the borders of the Republic of Moldova</p></div>

Lying within the borders of the Republic of Moldova, Gagauzia (officially the
_Autonomous Territorial Unit of Gagauzia_) is an autonomous municipality within
the region of Eastern Europe. The Gagauz people are believed to be around
300,000 in size. Most Gagauz live within Gagauzia, but healthy diaspora
communities exist in Ukraine, Turkey, and Russia.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fe/Location_Moldova_Europe.png" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>The Republic of Moldova is in Eastern Europe</p></div>

Although Gagauz origins remain unclear, the nation might have existed prior to
Ottoman colonization of the Balkans in the 14th century. In 1812, the region of
Bessarabia (modern day Moldova and part of Ukraine) was annexed by the Russian
empire. With the exception of 6 days in 1906, when the Gagauz led a revolution
against Russia, the Gagauz have always remained a minority within a larger
state. After the Soviet conquest of Moldova in the 1940s, an intellectual Gagauz
national movement flourished in the 1980s. By 1988, the Gagauz came together
with other ethnic minorities and founded a democratic assembly which voted in
favor of autonomy within the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. The city of
Comrat was chosen to be its capital.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/88/G%C3%B6k-Oguz_Yeri.JPG" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>"Welcome to Gagauzia" sign in the Gagauz language</p></div>

By 1991 the Soviet Union was crumbling. Although many Gagauz wished to remain
part of the Soviet bloc, the Moldovan parliament voted to secede from the USSR
on 27 August, 1991. In this moment Moldova was a fledging democracy and
parliament opted to work closely with its ethnic minorities in an effort to
strengthen its independence. By 1994 the Moldovan assembly passed the "Law on
the Special Legal Status of Gagauzia", solidifying the Gagauz autonomous
territory within the Republic of Moldova. The Gagauzian "national-territorial
autonomous unit" was soon created and ratified three official languages: Gagauz,
Romanian (Moldovan), and Russian.

Gagauzia soldiered on as Moldova labored to create a new post-Soviet identity.
By 2014, Gagauzia held a referendum to determine whether it wanted stronger ties
with the Russian Federation or the European Union. The constituency voted
overwhelmingly in favor of creating closer ties Russia.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/79/Gagauz.jpg" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>Gagauz people in traditional clothing</p></div>

The language spoken by the Gagauz people is part of the Oghuz branch of Turkic
languages, making it closely related to Turkish, Qashqai, Turkmen, and Azeri. It
was first written in the Greek alphabet in the late 1800s, and in 1957, under
Sovietization, the language adopted the Cyrillic alphabet. After Moldovan
independence, the Latin-based alphabet was adopted in 1993, having been largely
inspired by the modern Turkish alphabet.

<img style="display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 50%"
     src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/53/Gagauz-children.jpg" />

<div style="text-align: center"><p>A group of Gagauz</p></div>

Despite its small size, Gagauzia is a culturally rich part of Europe, with its
own linguistic heritage in a region that is largely Slavic and Romance.
Withstanding larger forces, it has forged an identity that remains similar yet
largely distinct from its peers, having emerged at the crossroads of West Asia
and Eastern Europe. The nation shares a long, deep history with Moldova, yet has
managed to not only survive, but exert its independence throughout centuries.
Whatever the future holds for this small nation, it is a place I enjoy learning
about and I hope to one day visit.
